Monitoring SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater during New York City's second wave of COVID-19: sewershed-level trends and relationships to publicly available clinical testing data†	Check for updates
Catherine Hoar, ORCID logo a   Francoise Chauvin,b   Alexander Clare,b   Hope McGibbon,b   Esmeraldo Castro,b   Samantha Patinella,b   Dimitrios Katehis,b   John J. Dennehy, ORCID logo cd   Monica Trujillo,e   Davida S. Smyth‡f  and  Andrea I. Silverman ORCID logo *a  
 Author affiliations
Abstract
New York City's wastewater monitoring program tracked trends in sewershed-level SARS-CoV-2 loads starting in the fall of 2020, just before the start of the city's second wave of the COVID-19 outbreak. During a five-month study period, from November 8, 2020 to April 11, 2021, viral loads in influent wastewater from each of New York City's 14 wastewater treatment plants were measured and compared to new laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases for the populations in each corresponding sewershed, estimated from publicly available clinical testing data. We found significant positive correlations between viral loads in wastewater and new COVID-19 cases. The strength of the correlations varied depending on the sewershed, with Spearman's rank correlation coefficients ranging between 0.38 and 0.81 (mean = 0.55). Based on a linear regression analysis of a combined data set for New York City, we found that a 1 log10 change in the SARS-CoV-2 viral load in wastewater corresponded to a 0.6 log10 change in the number of new laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases per day in a sewershed. An estimated minimum detectable case rate between 2–8 cases per day/100 000 people was associated with the method limit of detection in wastewater. This work offers a preliminary assessment of the relationship between wastewater monitoring data and clinical testing data in New York City. While routine monitoring and method optimization continue, information on the development of New York City's wastewater monitoring program may provide insights for similar wastewater-based epidemiology efforts in the future.

Graphical abstract: Monitoring SARS-CoV-2 in wastewater during New York City's second wave of COVID-19: sewershed-level trends and relationships to publicly available clinical testing data
This article is part of the themed collections: Recent Open Access Articles, Best Papers 2022 – Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology and Environmental Science – coronavirus research
Water impact
Expanding the use of wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) to inform public health responses requires an understanding of its performance across various communities. Results from New York City's SARS-CoV-2 wastewater monitoring program indicate associations between wastewater data and clinical data in a large urban setting and provide insights for the development of long-term WBE monitoring efforts.

Introduction
In March 2020, New York City became an epicenter of the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. In response to this first wave of COVID-19 cases, the New York City Department of Environmental Protection (NYC DEP) – the city agency responsible for wastewater collection and treatment – launched a wastewater monitoring program with the goal of tracking sewershed-level trends in the concentration of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus that causes COVID-19. The program was developed in partnership with researchers at New York University, Queens College, Queensborough Community College, and The New School, with all routine analysis conducted in the NYC DEP's existing microbiology laboratory under the management of the NYC DEP.

Wastewater-based epidemiology (WBE) programs for COVID-19, including the one in New York City (NYC), were established on the premise that SARS-CoV-2 virions are excreted in the human waste of individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 and that the resulting concentrations of viral RNA measured in wastewater are indicative of disease incidence or prevalence in the contributing sewershed. Significant associations between SARS-CoV-2 RNA concentrations measured in wastewater and metrics of COVID-19 disease incidence–including case rates–have been shown at scales ranging from single buildings to entire sewersheds.1–3 Early reports from WBE programs suggested promising applications that could help inform COVID-19 response measures,2,4 sparking widespread interest in SARS-CoV-2 monitoring programs around the world.5,6 While the extent to which wastewater data is a leading indicator of trends in COVID-19 incidence ahead of clinical data may vary depending on clinical testing rates,7,8 WBE data do offer the advantage of providing information representative of entire populations, free from clinical testing-related biases. In NYC, where communities of color and high-poverty areas were disproportionately impacted by the first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic,9 testing rates varied spatially, with significant demographic-based disparities.10 In situations where clinical testing does not adequately sample vulnerable populations, WBE may help inform modifications to testing strategies and provide supplemental information regarding COVID-19 trends. Wastewater monitoring is therefore a potential tool to identify new outbreaks of COVID-19 after high clinical testing rates associated with major “waves” of disease incidence have subsided or when resources and technical capacity for extensive clinical testing of individuals are limited.

These opportunities make WBE an attractive option for many municipalities, including NYC, to confirm findings from clinical testing about population-level COVID-19 dynamics and to monitor for new outbreaks in instances when testing is inadequate. In August 2020, the NYC DEP's SARS-CoV-2 wastewater monitoring program began routine analysis of influent wastewater collected from NYC's 14 wastewater treatment plants (referred to as wastewater resource recovery facilities (WRRFs) by the NYC DEP) (ESI† Table S1), capturing data during the region's second wave of COVID-19 cases, which started in the fall of 2020. The sewershed catchment areas contributing to each of the 14 WRRFs vary markedly in size, serving populations ranging from approximately 120 000 to 1.2 million residents. To assess the relationship between NYC sewershed-level SARS-CoV-2 RNA concentrations and confirmed cases of COVID-19 within each sewershed, wastewater data were compared to publicly available case data provided by the NYC Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DOHMH). In presenting findings from the NYC DEP, we also aim to provide insights into the development of a wastewater monitoring program designed for long-term, routine tracking of trends in virus loads for multiple sewersheds serving a large urban population.

Methods
Sample collection and processing
24 h flow-weighted composite influent wastewater samples were collected from each of NYC's 14 WRRFs twice weekly beginning August 31, 2020. From January 31, 2021 to April 18, 2021 sampling was reduced to once weekly. Each composite sample consisted of eight grab samples collected every three hours beginning at 7:00 AM on the sampling date. The volume of each grab sample added to the composite was determined based on the flowrate during the associated 3 h collection period. Samples were transported on ice and stored at 4 °C until processing, which started within twelve hours after the final grab sample was collected. For each sampling date, one of the 14 samples was analyzed in duplicate and the remainder were analyzed as single samples; facilities were selected for duplicate analysis on a rotating basis. A method blank containing type I deionized water was included with each set of samples to confirm the absence of contamination during sample processing. Detailed descriptions of materials, methods, and data analysis are provided in the ESI.† In brief, 40 mL aliquots of the 24 h composite samples were first pasteurized (60 °C, 90 min), and then centrifuged (5000 × g, 4 °C, 10 min) to remove solids. The supernatant was filtered (0.22 μm, cellulose acetate) and then subjected to virus concentration using polyethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation (addition of 4.0 g PEG and 0.9 g NaCl followed by overnight incubation at 4 °C, and centrifugation at 12000 × g at 4 °C for 120 min to pellet viruses).11 The supernatant was discarded and RNA (along with any DNA present) was extracted from the concentrated PEG pellet using the Qiagen QiaAmp Viral RNA Mini Kit with modifications (described in the ESI†).