medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Microsimulation based quantitative analysis of COVID-19 management strategies
István Z. Reguly1,2, Dávid Csercsik1, János Juhász1,3, Kálmán Tornai1, Zsófia Bujtár1, Gergely Horváth1, Bence Keömley-Horváth1,2, Tamás Kós1, György Cserey1, Kristóf Iván1, Sándor Pongor1, Gábor Szederkényi1, Gergely Röst4, Attila Csikász-Nagy1,5
1 Faculty of Information Technology and Bionics, Pázmány Péter Catholic University, Budapest, Hungary 2 Cytocast Kft., Vecsés, Hungary 3 Institute of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary 4 Bolyai Institute, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary 5 Randall Centre for Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom 
Summary
Background
Pandemic management includes a variety of control measures, such as social distancing, testing/quarantining and vaccination applied to a population where the virus is circulating. The COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic is mitigated by several non-pharmaceutical interventions, but it is hard to predict which of these regulations are the most effective for a given population.
Methods
We  developed  a  computationally  effective  and  scalable,  agent-based  microsimulation  framework.  This  unified framework  was  fitted  to  realistic  data  to  enable  us  to  test  control  measures  (closures,  quarantining,  testing, vaccination)  in  multiple  infection  waves  caused  by  the  spread  of  a  new  virus  variant  in  a  city-sized  societal environment. Our framework is capable of simulating nine billion agent-steps per minute, allowing us to model interactions in populations with up to 90 million individuals.
Findings
We show that vaccination strategies prioritising occupational risk groups minimise the number of infections but allow higher mortality while prioritising vulnerable groups minimises mortality but implies increased infection rate. We also found that intensive vaccination and non-pharmaceutical interventions can substantially suppress the spread of the virus, while low levels of vaccination and premature reopening may easily revert the epidemic to an uncontrolled state.
This  work  was  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  Hungarian  National    Development,    Research,    and
This  work  was  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  Hungarian  National    Development,    Research,    and
This  work  was  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  Hungarian  National    Development,    Research,    and
Interpretation
Our analysis highlights that while vaccination protects the elderly from COVID-19, a large percentage of children will contract and spread the virus, and we also show the benefits and limitations of various quarantine and testing scenarios.
Funding
This  work  was  carried  out  within  the  framework  of  the  Hungarian  National    Development,    Research,    and Innovation  (NKFIH) Fund 2020-2.1.1-ED-2020-00003.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice. 1
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Research in context Evidence before this study We still do not have an effective medical treatment against COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2), thus the majority of the efforts  to  stop  the  pandemic  focuses  on  non-pharmaceutical  interventions.  Each  country  came  up  with  a  local solution  to  stop  the  spread  of  the  virus  by  increased  testing,  quarantining,  lock-down  of  various  events  and institutions or early vaccination. There is no clear way how these interventions can be compared, and it is especially challenging  to  predict how  combinations of  interventions  could  influence  the  pandemic.  Various  mathematical modelling approaches helped decision-makers to foresee the effects of their decisions. Most of these models rely on classical, deterministic compartmental “SEIR” models, which can be solved easily but cannot take into account spatial effects and most non-pharmaceutical interventions affect the same parameters, so there is no way to analyse their separate or joint effects. Agent-based microsimulations are harder to solve but can consider far more details. Several models were developed on these lines focusing on questions about ideal vaccination, lock-down or other specific problems, but none of these studies evaluated and compared the individual and mixed effects of a wide variety of control measures. Added-value of this study Here  we  present  PanSim,  a  framework  where  we  introduce  a  detailed  infection  event  simulation  step  and  the possibility to control specific workplaces individually (schools, hospitals, etc.), test various vaccination, testing and quarantine scenarios while considering preconditions, age, sex, residence and workplace of individuals and mutant  viruses  with  various  infectivity.  The  level  of  details  and  granularity  of  simulations  allow  our  work  to evaluate this wide range of scenarios and control measures accurately and directly compare them with one another to provide quantitative evidence to support decision-makers. Analysis of our simulations also provides emergent results on the risks children and non-vaccinated individuals face. Implications of all the available evidence The agent-based microsimulation framework allows us to evaluate the risk and possible consequences of particular interventions precisely. Due  to  the outstanding efficiency of the computations, it is possible to  apply scenario- based analysis and control design methods which require a high number of simulation runs to obtain results on a given confidence level. This will enable us to design and quantitatively assess control measures in case of new waves of COVID-19 or new pandemic outbreaks.
2
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Introduction
Epidemic management includes a variety of control measures ranging from non-pharmaceutical interventions such as social distancing, testing and quarantining1,2, to vaccination3, hospitalisation, and beyond4–7. Typically, control measures  are  differentially  applied  to  various  groups  (compartments)  of  the  society  and  decision-makers  often need  to  refocus  their  intervention  strategies  as  new  infection  hotspots  or  new  virus  variants  emerge8,9. Mathematical  modelling  is  now  increasingly  used  to  inform  decision-makers10,11.  In  these  models,  disease progression is often described by variants of the now classical SEIR approach where individuals move between disease-related  compartments  (such  as  susceptible,  exposed,  infected,  and  removed12).  A  key  element  is  the probability  of  person-to-person  disease  transmission  upon  adequate  contact,  which  defines  the  likelihood  of  a person’s transition from the susceptible to the exposed compartment. This is often based on predefined values, but it can also be calculated from environmental data, using formulas of varying complexity13–15. Traditionally, the resulting models are then run with ordinary differential equations, which are deterministic and can provide crude estimates on how interventions may affect the outcome of the epidemic. Differential equations can be relatively easily fitted to pandemic data16–20 but have difficulty dealing with population heterogeneity and spatial context at sufficient resolution, especially as intervention strategies often change. For instance, differential equation driven analysis of vaccination strategies or other intervention policies is feasible and widely used19,20, but the number of compartments is  limited  and predominantly  organised  by (only  a  couple  of  parameters,  e.g.)  age or  serostatus. Another  strategy  is  provided  by  stochastic,  agent-based  models  (ABMs),  where  agents,  corresponding  to individuals,  move  and  transmit  the  infection  among  each  other.    ABMs  can  easily  handle  subgroups,  complex scenarios  and  also  provide  indications  regarding  the  geographic  spread  of  the  pandemics.  However,  they  are compute-intensive as they rely on repetitions of many elementary steps, and also, a large amount of external data is  required  for  their  parameterisation5,21–24.  There  is  a  clear  need  for  compute-efficient  fine-grained  ABM implementations to support decision-makers in planning and scheduling effective interventions such as vaccination policies and safe reopening schemes.
Methods
Here  we  present  a  modelling  approach  using  the  notions  of  control  theory  wherein  a  detailed,  agent-based, microsimulation description was built for a mid-sized Hungarian town using realistic statistics on the population as well as on its daily movements. We used this Pandemics Simulator model (for brevity PanSim) to simulate the COVID-19  (SARS-CoV-2)  pandemics  starting  from  the  onset  of  the  second  wave  in  the  Autumn  of  2020  and continuing through the Spring of 2021 until September 2021. During this time, various lock-down and opening measures were implemented, a new, fast-spreading virus variant appeared, and vaccination programs were started. All these events affected the dynamics of the pandemic and have been incorporated into the model for detailed analysis. A special focus of the simulations was the design of vaccination and reopening strategies used to inform decision-makers responsible for practical implementations.
Although the presented results are focused on a single town, PanSim can be applied to larger populations, and in fact, our results were used to assist Hungarian decision-makers in designing control measures. The performance of the core simulator enables the expansion of the model to a far larger population sizes. The limiting factor is the availability of uniformised data on population movements, but data from mobile network providers and services like Google Maps could overcome this barrier.
Modelling Framework
In our framework, agents represent people who live in a virtual city and follow daily routines consisting of regular activities such as going to work or school, resting during weekends, as well as stochastically selected elements such as shopping, entertainment, etc. Such an ensemble of agents is a typical complex, stochastic system25 where agents pass infection randomly to each other, and pandemic is a state of the system with an infection level above a threshold. Interventions, such as lock-downs, quarantines target specific parts of the system intending to bring
3
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
the system back to a “healthy” regime best described as an unrestricted state with no or low infection levels. This setup is analogous to controlling dynamical systems, a problem that occurs in many fields26. From this perspective, an intervention is a control measure (input) characterised by a few parameters (constraints), such as target (scope), speed, and resource requirements (costs). For instance, a lock-down measure can target a geographic region, or an age-group, or a type of business (say restaurants) or a given time of the day. A particular feature of pandemic management  is  that  a  series  of  interventions  or  scenarios  are  applied.  For  example,  vaccination  programs  or reopening plans are complex scenarios wherein simple interventions are carried out according to a given schedule in time and space. Precisely, in the presented micro-level model, 179,500 agents follow the statistical behaviour of the population of the Hungarian town of Szeged. At the heart of the model is an infection event, where virus transmission occurs with a probability depending on the proportion of infectious individuals present at a given location such as a home, classroom, or hospital ward22.  A fast-spreading virus variant – mastered on the example of B.1.1.7 that appeared in late 202027,28 – was considered to increase transmission probability by a factor of 1·5 to 1·929,30. Disease progression was considered to follow a SEIRD-like model9 in which an individual can be in a susceptible, exposed, infected, recovered, or deceased state (see supplement for details). Vaccination was included in the model as a reduction in individuals’ probability of contracting the virus. It was reduced to 52% and 96% after 12- and 28-days post-vaccination31, respectively. Before the simulation, PanSim was provided with input data such  as  the  number,  age-,  sex-  distribution,  medical  precondition,  etc.,  of  the  agents,  the  structure  of  families assigned  to  various  geographic  locations,  size  of  classes  at  schools  etc.  (see  supplement  for  details).  At  the beginning of the simulation, PanSim randomly assigned the agents to various locations (homes, schools, working places, etc.) as well as to daily routines (e.g., home-work-shopping-home). The agents were then let to follow their routine in the microsimulation (Fig. 1A), and they passed on the infection to each other with some probability, which  depends  on  their  infection  status.  In  the  one-year-long  simulations,  starting  from  1st  October  2020, additional lock-down and curfew restrictions were  implemented on 11th November 2020, and vaccination was started on 1st January 2021 (see supplement for detailed parameter sets). The B.1.1.7 variant was introduced into the population starting 11th January, leading to the third wave of infections in the Spring of 2021.
Results
Simulation outputs give geographic information about the number of simulated people at each location (Fig. 1A) and statistics on infection events at these locations (Fig. 1B). It is noticeable that restrictions decrease the number of infections generally, but the significant effects concentrate on institute types that are locked down during these restrictions  (Fig.  1B).  Closing  particular  types  of  locations  is  just  one  of  many  policies  applied  to  control  the pandemic.  The  modelling  framework  is  flexible  since  interaction  strategies  (quarantine  policies,  closures  of specific  locations,  testing  intensities,  and  reopening  timings)  can  be  implemented  by  simply  changing  input parameters rather than reprogramming the system. This makes it possible to calculate „intervention landscapes” in which these interventions and other key parameters (infectivity of a novel strain, vaccination intensities, and prioritisation order) are varied in a grid-like fashion, and the outcome of a given scenario is characterised by a colour code (Fig. 1C). A “severity function” was calculated for the measure of the seriousness of the pandemia by adding the total number of deaths to a scaled function of the total number of hospital beds occupied above a critical limit for the whole investigated period. This analysis shows that stronger interventions (such as high vaccination rates, stringent restrictive measures), as expected, tend to improve outcomes while other factors, for instance, the infectivity of the virus variants or too early reopening, can markedly deteriorate the outcome (Fig. 1C). From these strategies, we will now concentrate on a few key control parameters of the pandemic that plague decision-makers in many countries.
4
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure  1:  PanSim  realistically  simulates  population  movements  and  infections  in  the  virtual  city  emulating  Szeged.  (A) Institutions and households are localised in a virtual city. Colour codes represent different types of locations, and node sizes correlate with the number of infected people. (B) Distribution of infection events at various types of locations when the virus is unmitigated or when restrictions are applied. (Note the logarithmic scale, error bars show the uncertainty of 20 simulations.) (C) Sensitivity of the pandemic in various intervention types and levels. The colour code shows the severity function of the pandemics  for  the  labelled  changes.  (Details  on  the  analysed  scenarios  and  the  severity  function  can  be  found  in  the supplement.)
Quarantine strategies can have mixed effects with the arrival of a fast-spreading and more harmful virus variant
Quarantine procedures can follow different rules. If only the diagnosed infected patients are quarantined (Q1), and there is no contact tracing for quarantining, then the autumn wave is much larger, and most of the population get through the disease to reach herd immunity before the fast-spreading virus variant appears (Fig. 2A). With better tracking, resulting in quarantining households (Q2) as well as the classmates or a portion of workmates (Q3), the autumn wave is smaller, leaving more people susceptible for the more harmful variant in the spring wave (Fig. 2A). The severity of the pandemic is still much higher with a weaker quarantine policy because the hospital burden is exceptionally high for an extended period during the autumn wave (Fig. 1C, Fig. 2A). The simulator suggests that  the  eventual  total  number  of  deaths  is  higher  with  better  quarantining  policies,  partly  because  a  more transmissible and harmful variant appeared later (Fig. 2B). However, death rates would be higher when healthcare is overloaded, which is not accounted for in the simulator. We have also assumed that people who got infected by the slower spreading variant are fully immune to the new variant as well after recovery32.
Increased testing intensity can effectively suppress only moderately infective virus strains
The WHO recommends that the ratio of positive tests should remain under 5% in order to control pandemics. With our simulations fitted to the Hungarian testing rate (Supplementary Figure 4) (testing ~0·15% of the population daily), we see far higher positivity values (Fig. 2C). If we increase the testing rate to ~3·50% of the population
5
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
tested each day (see supplement for details) – which level was reached only by a few countries – then we can push the positivity rate below 5% (Fig. 2C). The model follows here the “contact tracing” concept, where housemates, class-/workmates of positively tested individuals are tested the next day with some probability (these rates were increased in simulations on Fig. 2 C,D). With testing, ~3·50% of the population each day, the positivity rate is pushed below 3% (Fig. 2C), but even with such low positivity, we find a severe hospital burden during the spring wave (Fig. 2D). We can conclude that extensive testing could repress the pandemic with a moderately infective virus  (average  European  strains  spreading  during  the  autumn  wave)  (Fig.  2D).  However,  extensive  testing  is incapable of controlling the pandemic of a highly transmissible and more harmful variant, such as B.1.1.7 (spring wave of Fig. 2D), despite vaccination starting around the same time as the appearance of this variant (Fig. 2A inset).




Figure 2: Variations in quarantine scenarios and testing intensities can slow down but not suppress the pandemics. (A- B) Time course of simulations with varied quarantine scenarios (Q1 – diagnosed patient quarantined at home, Q2 – diagnosed patient  and  household  quarantined,  Q3  –  patient,  household  and  workmates/classmates  are  quarantined)  showing  (A)  the percentage  of  hospitalised  COVID-19  patients  in  the  population  and  (B)  the  accumulated  number  of  death  events  due  to COVID-19 scaled to the whole population. Appearance and spread of the B.1.1.7 variant are shown on the inset of panel A. Start date of restrictions and the start of vaccination are noted on plots. (C-D) The testing rate was increased from the reference value of 0.15% of people tested daily, fitted to Hungarian data (Supplementary Figure 4), to the highest level achieved by most actively  testing  countries  (3·5%  daily).  (C)  Time  courses  of  the  daily  ratio  of  positive  tests  and  (D)  the  percentage  of hospitalised COVID-19 patients in the population each day (hospital burden) are plotted. Daily testing rates are shown on the inset of panel C. (Average and std. of 20 simulations are shown.)
Vaccination order strategies have opposing effects on new infection numbers and hospital burden
Ever since the COVID-19 vaccination started towards the end of 2020, vaccines were in short supply in many countries, so decision-makers had to design vaccination strategies that determined whom to vaccinate and in what order (e.g., differences between Israel and the EU)33. One approach is to concentrate on vulnerable groups, such
6
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
as the elderly, the chronically ill, etc. These groups were then vaccinated in the order of decreasing vulnerability. Another  approach  is  to  select  groups  according  to  their  essentiality  and  occupational  risk,  such  as  healthcare professionals, nursing home workers, teaching personnel, etc. Both ordering methods could have their benefits, and various countries follow either one of these or a mixed prioritisation rule. In earlier plots, we assumed a mixed order used in Hungary. Still, we have also analysed the differences caused by using the two extreme strategies (see supplement  for  details  of  different  vaccination  orders).  The  occupational  risk  method  is  better  in  controlling infection  numbers  and  helps  to  maintain  key  infrastructure  (e.g.  essential  workers),  but  the  number  of  the hospitalised and deceased people is lower in the case of vulnerability-based prioritisation (Fig 3 A-C). The reason for this difference is apparently that the elderly and people with chronic conditions who otherwise make up the majority of hospitalised and deceased patients are vaccinated first, and so they avoid infection. Early vaccination of highly vulnerable groups can in itself reduce the hospital burden even at higher infection rates in the spring wave (Fig 3B). Nevertheless, the key strategy to control the pandemic is to increase the vaccination intensity (Fig. 3D), which could have a far larger effect than varying the vaccination order (compare Fig. 3B – before reopening and Fig. 3D).
Too early reopening after lock-downs can lengthen pandemics
Curfew in evening hours and lock-down of social event sites, restaurants, and pubs is a crucial strategy to control pandemics by decreasing the number of interactions between individuals. In the simulations presented, all of these restrictions were applied from November 2020 (dashed line in plots of Fig. 2 and 3). A crucial question is when these restrictions can be lifted, and life can return to “normal”.

Figure 3: Results of various vaccination and reopening strategies. (A) Percentage of the population infected, (B) percentage of hospitalised COVID-19 patients in the population, (C) the accumulated number of death events due to COVID-19 scaled to the whole population, each day. Panel A-C were simulated with the assumption that daily 0.2% of the population could be vaccinated.  (D)  Changes  in  this  rate  have  major  effects  on  the  percentage  of  hospital  patients.    (Average  and  std.  of  20 simulations are shown.)
7
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
In Figure 3 A-C, we also analysed the effects of lifting these restrictions at three different time points. Reopening close to the peak of the pandemic can lead to the collapse of the healthcare system by filling up hospitals (Fig. 3B) and increase the total death cases (Fig. 3C). Reopening while the number of infections is dropping could extend the length of the pandemic leading to a slight increase in total death counts, but not affect the hospital burden too dramatically (Fig. 3 B, C).
Discussion
The  modelling  framework  described  here  was  primarily  developed  to  handle  lock-down,  quarantine,  and vaccination scenarios. Nevertheless, relevant new information emerged from the simulation results. For instance, it shows that the autumn wave affected the various age groups quite similarly, while in the larger  spring wave, distinct  age  groups  were  differentially  involved  (Fig.  4A).  In  these  simulations,  we  used  the  vulnerability vaccination order, resulting in a situation where the elderly are less often infected than younger people in the spring wave. Specifically, almost 50% of children below 14 who meet in schools (students over 14 are home-schooling in these simulations) go through the infection during the spring wave (Fig. 4A).
We  can  calculate  the  critically  investigated  effective  reproduction  number  (Rt),  defined  as  the  actual  average number of secondary cases per primary case at a given time (see supplement for details). When Rt is below one, the epidemic is declining, while the number of cases is increasing when it is above one. Plotting the simulated changes of the effective reproduction number in time, together  with the same values empirically calculated for Hungary and the solution of a deterministic model9, we can observe that PanSim microsimulation provides a more detailed and better prediction of the observed data (Fig. 4B).


Figure 4: High infection rate of children and precise, effective reproduction number (Rt) emerge from the simulation results. (A) Percentage of the various age groups catching the infection during the autumn and the spring wave  (error bars show the uncertainty of 20 simulations). (B) Changes in the reproduction number of the virus were calculated from the reference scenario  (Fig.  1C)  simulations  (average  and  std.  of  20  simulations)  plotted  together  with  the  fits  of  a  deterministic  SEIRD model and empirical data about Hungary34.
PanSim can be applied to complex, realistic scenarios and can test the effects of various interventions. Here we used these features to gain a general understanding of the impact of various quarantine strategies, possibilities to contain the pandemic by increased testing, optimal vaccination ordering and risks of early reopening. Directions of further development include differentiation between vaccine efficacies and taking into consideration the waning of immunity. The emergence of new virus variants with their specific epidemiological parameters and potential capability to escape previously acquired immunity could also be considered in an extended version of the model. From an algorithmic perspective, an intervention in PanSim is a uniformly built GPU (graphics processing unit) compatible module that has input parameters such as the type of intervention, speed, resource availability etc., and that can be combined into realistic scenarios (see https://github.com/khbence/pansim and supplement for details). The model could be adapted to specific data on any other cities, regions, or countries. Simulations of one year
8
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
considered with a ten-minute timestep for 179,500 agents were run under 64 seconds on a single NVIDIA V100 GPU. Still, the code is scalable up to 90 million agents on a single GPU. This computational speed enables PanSim to be used for control design, where interventions are optimised towards specific goals (e.g., keeping healthcare burden below a threshold while minimising the costs caused by quarantining people)9,12. Events with finer spatial resolution, for example, using public transport or working in separated offices, are feasible to implement in case of sufficient input data. The performance can also be scaled up to country or continent level simulations, including occasional long-distance trips (e.g. tourism or business) that could be crucial in the importation of diseases. The major challenge here is collecting the data on individuals’ movements to feed into the simulator. However, with extensive, uniformised data35 it will be possible to use PanSim to study detailed and dynamically changing country- specific intervention strategies in fine spatio-temporal resolution upon this, or possible later pandemics.
Data Sharing
The code used for the simulations is available here: https://github.com/khbence/pansim, and it contains links to the data used to run the scenarios described.
Declaration of Interests
We declare no competing interests 
Acknowledgements
We thank colleagues at the Lechner Knowledge Center, GeoX Kft. and at Szeged Municipality for data sources.
Author Contributions: IZR and BKH developed the tool, IZR, DC, JJ, ZB, GH, and TK designed and performed simulations, KT, GH, TK and GR collected data, KT built the database, all authors analysed and interpreted results, SP, GS, GR and ACN supervised the project, IZR, JJ, SP, ZB, KT and ACN wrote the paper by contributions to all authors, IZR, DC, JJ, SP, GS, GR and ACN designed the study. All authors approved the submitted version.
Additional Information: Supplementary Information is available for this paper. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to IZR (reguly.istvan.zoltan@itk.ppke.hu) or  ACN (csikasz- nagy.attila@itk.ppke.hu).
References
1 Peak CM, Kahn R, Grad YH,  et al. Individual quarantine versus active monitoring of contacts for the mitigation of COVID-19: a modelling study. Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20: 1025–33.
2       Wells  CR,  Townsend  JP,  Pandey  A,  et  al.  Optimal  COVID-19  quarantine  and  testing  strategies.  Nat Commun 2021; 12: 1–9.
3 Forni G, Mantovani A, Forni G, et al. COVID-19 vaccines: where we stand and challenges ahead. Cell Death Differ. 2021; 28: 626–39.
4 Ferguson NM, Cummings DAT, Fraser C, Cajka JC, Cooley PC, Burke DS. Strategies for mitigating an influenza pandemic. Nature 2006; 442: 448–52.
5       Chang SL, Harding N, Zachreson C, Cliff OM, Prokopenko M. Modelling transmission and control of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia. Nat Commun 2020; 11: 1–13.
6       Nadanovsky P, dos Santos APP. Strategies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic. Braz. Oral Res. 2020; 34. DOI:10.1590/1807-3107BOR-2020.VOL34.0068.
7 Sturniolo S, Waites W, Colbourn T, Manheim D, Panovska-Griffiths J. Testing, tracing and isolation in compartmental models. PLoS Comput Biol 2021; 17: e1008633.
9
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
8       Ecdc. SARS-CoV-2 - increased circulation of variants of concern and vaccine rollout in the EU/EEA -
8       Ecdc. SARS-CoV-2 - increased circulation of variants of concern and vaccine rollout in the EU/EEA - 14th  update.  https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/covid-19/timeline-ecdc-response.This (accessed  20th March, 2021). Péni T, Csutak B, Szederkényi G, Röst G. Nonlinear model predictive control with logic constraints for COVID-19 management. Nonlinear Dyn 2020; 102: 1965–86. 10     Vespignani A, Tian H, Dye C, et al. Modelling COVID-19. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2020; 2: 279–81. Perra N. Non-pharmaceutical interventions during the COVID-19 pandemic: A review. Phys. Rep. 2021; published online 13th February. DOI:10.1016/j.physrep.2021.02.001. 12     Röst G, Bartha FA, Bogya N, et al. Early phase of the COVID-19 outbreak in hungary and post-lockdown scenarios. Viruses 2020; 12: 1–30. 13     Watanabe T, Bartrand TA, Weir MH, Omura T, Haas CN. Development of a dose-response model for SARS coronavirus. Risk Anal 2010; 30: 1129–38. 14     Zhang  N,  Huang  H,  Su  B,  Ma  X,  Li  Y.  A  human  behavior  integrated  hierarchical  model  of  airborne disease transmission in a large city. Build Environ 2018; 127: 211–20. de Oliveira PM, Mesquita LCC, Gkantonas S, Giusti A, Mastorakos E. Evolution of spray and  aerosol from respiratory releases: theoretical estimates for insight on viral transmission. Proc R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci 2021; 477: 20200584. 16     Liu M, Thomadsen R, Yao S. Forecasting the spread of COVID-19 under different reopening strategies. Sci Rep 2020; 10: 1–8. Pinto Neto O, Kennedy DM, Reis JC, et al. Mathematical model of COVID-19 intervention scenarios for São Paulo-Brazil. Nat Commun 2021; 12: 418. 18     Reiner RC, Barber RM, Collins JK, et al. Modeling COVID-19 scenarios for the United States. Nat Med 2021; 27: 94–105. 19     Matrajt L, Eaton J, Leung T, Brown ER. Vaccine optimisation for COVID-19: Who to vaccinate first? Sci Adv 2020; 7: eabf1374. 20     Bubar KM, Reinholt K, Kissler SM, et al. Model-informed COVID-19 vaccine prioritisation strategies by age and serostatus. Science (80- ) 2021; : eabe6959. 21     Chang S, Pierson E, Koh PW, et al. Mobility network models of COVID-19 explain inequities and inform reopening. Nature 2021; 589: 82–7. 22     Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science (80- ) 2020; 368: 395–400. 23     Hoertel N, Blachier M, Blanco C, et al. A stochastic agent-based model of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in France. Nat Med 2020; 26: 1417–21. 24     Rockett RJ, Arnott A, Lam C,  et al. Revealing COVID-19 transmission in Australia by SARS-CoV-2 genome sequencing and agent-based modeling. Nat Med 2020; 26: 1398–404. 25     Galea S, Riddle M, Kaplan GA. Causal thinking and complex system approaches in epidemiology. Int J Epidemiol 2010; 39: 97–106. 26     Nise NS. Control Systems Engineering, 8th Edition | Wiley. Wilney, 2020. 27     Davies NG, Jarvis CI, van Zandvoort K, et al. Increased mortality in community-tested cases of SARS- CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7. Nature 2021; : 1–5. 28     Volz E, Mishra S, Chand M, et al. Assessing transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 in England. Nature 2021; : 1–6. Supasa  P,  Zhou  D,  Dejnirattisai  W,  et  al.  Reduced  neutralisation  of  SARS-CoV-2  B.1.1.7  variant  by convalescent and vaccine sera. Cell 2021; 184: 2201-2211.e7. 30     Brookman S, Cook J, Zucherman M, Broughton S, Harman K, Gupta A. Effect of the new SARS-CoV-2 variant B.1.1.7 on children and young people. Lancet Child Adolesc. Heal. 2021; 5: e9–10.
9 10     Vespignani A, Tian H, Dye C, et al. Modelling COVID-19. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2020; 2: 279–81. 11
12     Röst G, Bartha FA, Bogya N, et al. Early phase of the COVID-19 outbreak in hungary and post-lockdown 13     Watanabe T, Bartrand TA, Weir MH, Omura T, Haas CN. Development of a dose-response model for 14     Zhang  N,  Huang  H,  Su  B,  Ma  X,  Li  Y.  A  human  behavior  integrated  hierarchical  model  of  airborne 15
16     Liu M, Thomadsen R, Yao S. Forecasting the spread of COVID-19 under different reopening strategies.
17 18     Reiner RC, Barber RM, Collins JK, et al. Modeling COVID-19 scenarios for the United States. Nat Med 19     Matrajt L, Eaton J, Leung T, Brown ER. Vaccine optimisation for COVID-19: Who to vaccinate first? 20     Bubar KM, Reinholt K, Kissler SM, et al. Model-informed COVID-19 vaccine prioritisation strategies 21     Chang S, Pierson E, Koh PW, et al. Mobility network models of COVID-19 explain inequities and inform
22     Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, et al. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel
23     Hoertel N, Blachier M, Blanco C, et al. A stochastic agent-based model of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in 24     Rockett RJ, Arnott A, Lam C,  et al. Revealing COVID-19 transmission in Australia by SARS-CoV-2
25     Galea S, Riddle M, Kaplan GA. Causal thinking and complex system approaches in epidemiology. Int J 26     Nise NS. Control Systems Engineering, 8th Edition | Wiley. Wilney, 2020. 27     Davies NG, Jarvis CI, van Zandvoort K, et al. Increased mortality in community-tested cases of SARS- 28     Volz E, Mishra S, Chand M, et al. Assessing transmissibility of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 in England. 29 30     Brookman S, Cook J, Zucherman M, Broughton S, Harman K, Gupta A. Effect of the new SARS-CoV-2
10
medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.06.20.21259214 ; this version posted June 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
31 Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, et al. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 2603–15.
32     Arafkas M, Khosrawipour T, Kocbach P, et al. Current meta-analysis does not support the possibility of COVID-19 reinfections. J Med Virol 2021; 93: 1599–604.
33     Cylus J, Panteli D, van Ginneken E. Who should be vaccinated first? Comparing vaccine prioritisation strategies in Israel and European countries using the Covid-19 Health System Response Monitor. Isr. J. Health Policy Res. 2021; 10: 16.
34     Arroyo-Marioli  F,  Bullano  F,  Kucinskas  S,  Rondón-Moreno  C.  Tracking  R  of  COVID-19:  A  new real-time estimation using the Kalman filter. PLoS One 2021; 16: e0244474.
35     Buckee CO, Balsari S, Chan J, et al. Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19. Science.).
35     Buckee CO, Balsari S, Chan J, et al. Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19. Science.). 2020; 368: 145–6.
11
