ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect
ContentslistsavailableatScienceDirect InformationFusion journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/inffus Editorial
Editorial Editorial:Advancesinmulti-sourceinformationfusionforepidemicdiseases
We are living in unprecedented times and as the coronavirus pan- demicdeepensandmorerestrictionsareputinplacearoundtheworld, theimpactoftheCOVID-19crisisonourlivescanbetroublingandcon- fusing.Withthecontinuousattemptsofscientificresearchinstitutions, advancedinformationfusiontechnologieshavebeenactivelyleveraged to comprehensively harness the multi-source epidemical information from medical devices, biomedical sensors, mobile terminals, social networks,etc.,improvingtheefficiencyforepidemicmonitoring,virus tracking,prevention,controlandtreatment,andresourceallocation. Although the information fusion technologies have unique advan- tages and can play an important role in responding to epidemic dis- eases,therearethreemainchallengestodevelopstrategiesinpractice: (i)gapsexistbetweenresearchersindifferentareaslikecomputersci- ence,bioinformatics,epidemiologyandmolecularmodelingmakingit difficulttocognizetheproblemindepthfrommulti-sourceinformation; (ii) epidemiological information is vast so that we need considerable and effective approaches to harness it; (iii) there is still a lack of practical approaches, algorithms and tools for information fusion to fightthevirusandsavelives. TheresponsetoourCallforPapersonthisspecialissuewassatis- factory,with67submissionsfromaroundtheglobe.Duringthereview process, each paper was assigned to and reviewed by at least three experts in the relevant areas, with a rigorous at least two rounds review process. Thanks to the great support of the Editor-in-Chief of Information Fusion, Prof. FRANCISCO HERRERA TRIGUERO, we are able to accept 10 excellent articles with high quality that explore re- centadvancesanddisseminatestate-of-the-artresearchonmulti-source informationfusionforepidemicmonitoring,virustracking,prevention, controlandtreatment,andresourceallocation. Thefirstarticle,‘‘TheintroductionofpopulationmigrationtoSEIAR for COVID-19 epidemic modeling with an efficient intervention strat- egy’’[1],proposedadynamicsmodelofSEIRbasedontheepidemio- logicalcharacteristicsofCOVID-19inpatients.Afterthat,theproposed modelwasprovedtobeconsistentwiththetransmissioncharacteristics ofCOVID-19throughsimulationexperiments.Moreover,thesimulation resultsemphasizedtheinfluenceofsocialdistancingandmobilityrate onthetotalnumberofinfections.Thisarticleprovidedabasisforthe governmenttoformulatepoliciestocontroltheepidemic. The second article titled ‘‘SDMP: A secure detector for epidemic diseasefilebasedonDNN’’[2]proposedasecuredetectorofmalicious PDF file for epidemic disease file based on Deep Neural Network to solvetheproblemofprivacyandsecurityinhandlingepidemicdisease file.Experimentshowedthatthedetectionaccuracyoftheproposed
detectorcouldachieveupto99.3%.Moreover,thetimecostontraining and forecasting of the proposed DNN model was extremely low, less than1sperepoch. In the next article with the title ‘‘COVID-19 classification by CC- SHNet with deep fusion using transfer learning and discriminant cor- relation analysis’’ [3], the authors designed and developed a novel advanced AI system for COVID-19 classification based on chest CT (CCT) images. They first used a novel (L, 2) transfer feature learning algorithmtoextractfeatureswithahyperparameterofnumberoflayers to be removed. Second, a selection algorithm of pretrained network for fusion was proposed to choose the best two models. Third, deep CCT fusion by discriminant correlation analysis was proposed to help fuse the two features from two models. From the test on the dataset, it proved that the new model named as CCSHNet was effective in detecting COVID-19 and other lung infectious diseases. It could assist radiologiststomakethefinaldiagnosisdecisions. Thefourtharticletitled‘‘Multi-sourceinformationfusionanddeep- learning-basedcharacteristicsmeasurementforexploringtheeffectsof peerengagementonstockpricesynchronicity’’[4]appliedatwo-level informationfusionapproachtoexaminetheeffectsofpeerengagement on social media on stock price synchronicity, especially in epidemic contexts, based on multi-source information from financial market and social media. Multiple factors were constructed for characteris- tics measurement of peer engagement. Particularly, a more refined alternative measurement of informativeness was proposed through a deep-learning-based sentiment analysis. The empirical results showed that during epidemics, synchronicity was much higher, and group diversity and experts had stronger effects in lowering synchronicity, while the effects of informativeness and information diffusion were hampered. In the fifth article, ‘‘COVID-19 and Non-COVID-19 Classification usingMulti-layersFusionFromLungUltrasoundImages’’[5],amulti- layerfusionmethodofaCNNarchitecturewassuggestedforaCOVID- 19 screening framework based on lung ultrasound images. The pro- posed CNN was a lightweight model that had less than 0.4 million parameters. Features from different layers of the CNN were fused using a multilayer perceptron. The proposed method achieved a very high information density compared to other existing methods using pretrainedCNNmodels. In the next article with the title ‘‘Risk Prediction of Diabetes: Big data mining with fusion of multifarious physical examination indi- cators’’ [6], the authors designed a diabetes risk assessment system
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2021.05.016 1 May 2021
Editorial to predict diabetes risk by fusing multifarious types of physical ex- amination data. The system consisted of three modules: the diabetes
their valuable comments and suggestions that significantly improved the quality of the articles. We also would like to acknowledge the
to predict diabetes risk by fusing multifarious types of physical ex- amination data. The system consisted of three modules: the diabetes risk assessment model, the diabetes risk scorecard, and the follow-up satisfactionmodel.Itcouldevaluatediabetesriskfromdifferentlevels. Thus, it was not only applicable to the public health system but was alsoconvenientfortheimplantationofwearabledevicesorsmarthome systemsbasedontheInternetofThings(IoT).Thissystemwasexpected toprovideguidanceforhumanhealthmanagement. Theseventharticle,‘‘Multimodalfeature-wiseco-attentionmethod for visual question answering’’ [7], proposed a feature-wise attention mechanism for visual question answering (VQA) to extract more dis- criminative representations for image and question modalities. The authors designed novel modules to model the inter-modal feature- wise attention, and combine the visual spatial attention with feature- wise attention to develop a new network model for VQA. The ex- perimentalresultsdemonstratedthattheproposedapproachachieved the state-of-the-art performance on two large-scale, real-world VQA datasets. Theeightharticletitled‘‘Ananalysismodelofdiagnosisandtreat- mentforCOVID-19pandemicbasedonmedicalinformationfusion’’[8] proposed an analysis model of diagnosis and treatment for COVID-19 basedonreal-worldclinicaldata.Theyconstructedtheheterogeneous informationnetworktodiscoverthecomplexrelationshipsamongthe syndromes, symptoms, and medicines. Then, the Skip-Gram model wasusedtogeneratethenumericalsymptom(medicine)embeddings, which were divided into seven communities (syndromes) by Spectral Clusteringalgorithm.Fromtheexperimentalresults,theauthorsproved that this model could effectively identify the critical symptoms and symptom distribution for diagnosis. It could provide tremendously valuableguidanceforcombattingtheCOVID-19. Intheninetharticle,‘‘Incrementallearningforexudateandhemor- rhagesegmentationonfundusimages’’[9],ontheDiabeticRetinopathy (DR) lesion segmentation problem, a novel incremental segmentation paradigmwasproposedtodistilltheknowledgeofthepreviousmodel to improve the current model. Remarkably, it proposed various ap- proachesworkingontheclass-basedalignmentoftheprobabilitymaps of the current and the previous model, accounting for the difference betweenthebackgroundclassesofthetwomodels. IoT based control of disease spread as an application of e-health canplayavitalroleincounteringrapidlyspreadingdiseasesthatcan effectively manage health emergency scenarios like pandemics. It re- quiresmonitoringtheStandardoperatingprocedure(SOP)follow-upof thepopulationinthedisease-proneareawithacost-effectivereporting and responding mechanism to register any violation. The last article titled‘‘SPICE-IT:SmartCOVID-19pandemiccontrollederadicationover NDN-IoT’’[10]proposedasolutiontocounterthesechallenges,smart COVID-19 pandemic-controlled eradication over NDN-IoT (SPICE-IT) mechanism, including autonomous SOP monitoring in indoor envi- ronments with efficient pull-based reporting mechanism that records violationsatlocalserversandcloudserver. In conclusion, we express our gratitude to the authors for their excellent contributions to this Special Issue. We are thankful for all reviewers dedicating their efforts in reviewing these papers, and for
their valuable comments and suggestions that significantly improved the quality of the articles. We also would like to acknowledge the guidance from the Editor-in-Chief and staff members. We hope that thisSpecialIssuewillserveasgoodreferenceforresearchers,scientists, engineersandacademiciansinthefieldofinformationfusion. Declarationofcompetinginterest
Declarationofcompetinginterest The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to
The authors declare that they have no known competing finan- cial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influencetheworkreportedinthispaper. References
References [1] M. Chen, M. Li, Y. Hao, Z. Liu, L. Hu, L. Wang, The introduction of popu-
IztokHumar UniversityofLjubljana,Slovenia E-mailaddress:iztok.humar@fe.uni-lj.si. PasqualePace UniversityofCalabria,Italy
[1] M. Chen, M. Li, Y. Hao, Z. Liu, L. Hu, L. Wang, The introduction of popu- lation migration to SEIAR for COVID-19 epidemic modeling with an efficient intervention strategy, Inf. Fusion 64 (2020) 252–258. [2] Y. Sun, Y. Cui, Y. Huang, Z. Lin, SDMP: A secure detector for epidemic disease file based on DNN, Inf. Fusion 68 (2021) 1–7. [3] S.-H. Wang, D.R. Nayak, D.S. Guttery, X. Zhang, Y.-D. Zhang, COVID-19 clas- sification by ccshnet with deep fusion using transfer learning and discriminant correlation analysis, Inf. Fusion 68 (2021) 131–148. [4] L. Li, F. Zhu, H. Sun, Y. Hu, Y. Yang, D. Jin, Multi-source information fusion and deep-learning-based characteristics measurement for exploring the effects of peer engagement on stock price synchronicity, Inf. Fusion 69 (2021) 1–21. [5] G. Muhammad, M.S. Hossain, COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 classification using multi-layers fusion from lung ultrasound images, Inf. Fusion 72 (2021) 80–88. [6] H. Yang, Y. Luo, X. Ren, M. Wu, X. He, B. Peng, K. Deng, D. Yan, H. Tang, H. Lin, Risk prediction of diabetes: Big data mining with fusion of multifarious physical examination indicators, Inf. Fusion (2021). [7] S. Zhang, M. Chen, J. Chen, F. Zou, Y.-F. Li, P. Lu, Multimodal feature-wise co-attention method for visual question answering, Inf. Fusion 73 (2021) 1–10. [8] F. Hu, M. Huang, J. Sun, X. Zhang, J. Liu, An analysis model of diagnosis and treatment for COVID-19 pandemic based on medical information fusion, Inf. Fusion 73 (2021) 11–21. [9] W. He, X. Wang, L. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Yang, X. Yao, X. Zhao, L. Ju, L. Wu, L. Wu, et al., Incremental learning for exudate and hemorrhage segmentation on fundus images, Inf. Fusion 73 (2021) 157–164. [10] M.T.R. Khan, M.M. Saad, M.A. Tariq, J. Akram, D. Kim, SPICE-IT: Smart COVID-19 pandemic controlled eradication over NDN-IoT, Inf. Fusion (2021). YinZhang ∗ UniversityofElectronicScienceandTechnologyofChina,China
YinZhang ∗ UniversityofElectronicScienceandTechnologyofChina,China E-mailaddresses:yin.zhang.cn@ieee.org, zhangyin123@uestc.edu.cn. AlaAl-Fuqaha WesternMichiganUniversity,UnitedStatesofAmerica
PasqualePace UniversityofCalabria,Italy E-mailaddress:p.pace@dimes.unical.it.
AlaAl-Fuqaha WesternMichiganUniversity,UnitedStatesofAmerica E-mailaddress:aalfuqaha@wmich.edu. IztokHumar UniversityofLjubljana,Slovenia
∗ Correspondingeditor.

