review article
Wien Klin Wochenschr (2021) 133:714–720 https://doi.org/10.1007/s00508-020-01746-2


Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases
Meinolf Ebbers · Christoph J. Hemmer · Brigitte Müller-Hilke · Emil C. Reisinger
Received: 27 February 2020 / Accepted: 7 September 2020 / Published online: 16 December 2020 © The Author(s) 2020
Summary Due to the overuse of antibiotics, infec- tions, in particular those caused by multidrug-resis- tant bacteria, are becoming more and more frequent. Despite the worldwide introduction of antibiotic ther- apy, vaccines and constant improvements in hygiene, the burden of multidrug-resistant bacterial infections is increasing and is expected to rise in the future. The development of monoclonal therapeutic antibodies and speciﬁc immunomodulatory drugs represent new treatment options in the ﬁght against infectious dis- eases. This article provides a brief overview of recent advances in immunomodulatory therapy and other strategies in the treatment of infectious disease.
Keywords Infectious disease · Immunotherapy · Immunomodulation · Bacterial infections · Monoclonal antibodies
Immunization against smallpox was being carried out in Asia by means of variolation as early as around 1700. The exudate from smallpox blisters was intro- duced into the nose of the person being inoculated with the help of long bamboo canes [1, 2]. At the end of the eighteenth century the British country doctor Edward Jenner introduced vaccination against small- pox, replacing the far more dangerous method of in-
Dr. med. M. Ebbers · PD Dr. med. habil. C. J. Hemmer · Prof. Dr. E. C. Reisinger, MBA ((cid:2)) Department of Tropical Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Rostock University Medical Center, Ernst-Heydemann-Str. 6, 18057 Rostock, Germany emil.reisinger@uni-rostock.de
oculation. Finally, in 1979 the World Health Organiza- tion (WHO) announced the worldwide eradication of smallpox. The ﬁrst vaccine against typhoid fever was developed in 1886, the ﬁrst vaccine against cholera in 1896 and the ﬁrst vaccine against the plague in 1897. The ﬁrst vaccines against Bordetella pertussis followed in 1926 and the Bacille Calmette-Guérin (BCG) vac- cine against tuberculosis in 1927. In the years after 1970 vaccines against Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neis- seria meningitidis, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type B, an- thrax and cholera were developed. A vaccine against borreliosis was approved by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 1998, but it was withdrawn from the market within less than 2 years due to more than 1000 reports of side effects [3]. The develop- ment of new vaccines has the potential to reduce not only infectious disease morbidity and mortality, but also the use of antibiotics and, consequently, the de- velopment of antimicrobial resistance. Recently, a re- combinant vaccine against two of the most common serotypes K1 and K2 of the hazardous bacterium Kleb- siella pneumoniae has been successfully utilized to protect mice against fatal infections. Klebsiella are common pathogens of nosocomial urinary and res- piratory tract infections, and particularly antibiotic- resistant types, such as carbapenemase-bearing or ex- tended spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) positive Kleb- siella strains are characterized by complex and some- times challenging therapeutic approaches [4]. Besides antimicrobial resistance, vaccines also have the po- tential to reduce morbidity and mortality in acute global healthcare crises and to reduce the transmis- sion of infectious diseases in our globalized world. This is especially relevant regarding the ongoing pan- demic of the novel severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The virus is a single- stranded RNA virus causing life-threatening respira- tory illnesses [5]. According to the US Center for Sys-
Dr. med. M. Ebbers · Prof. Dr. rer. nat. B. Müller-Hilke, MME Core Facility for Cell Sorting and Cell Analysis, Rostock University Medical Center, Schillingallee 70, 18057 Rostock, Germany
K 714 Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases
review article
tems Science and Engineering (CSSE) until 12 May 2020 the virus has infected approximately 4.2 mil- lion people and caused 286,000 deaths [6]. To end the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, the world is in urgent need of an effective, safe and durable vaccine. Currently at least 8 candidate vac- cines are being tested in clinical trials and 102 candi- date vaccines are in preclinical evaluation. Most of the candidate vaccines are mRNA or DNA vaccines, live vaccines, vector virus vaccines, inactivated vaccines or viral protein subunits vaccines. First results from human trials are expected within the next few months [7]. Since SARS-CoV-2 also affects pets and other ani- mals, an animal vaccine is also urgently needed [8]. Another vaccine urgently needed is against Plas- modium falciparium. According to the World Malaria Report 2019 an estimated 228 million cases and 405,000 deaths of malaria occurred worldwide in 2018. Several promising vaccine candidates are currently under investigation. As of 18 May 2020, there are 199 registered trials involving malaria vac- cines [9]. Currently, RTS,S/AS01 is thought to be the most advanced and extensively tested candidate vaccine against P. falciparum. The subunit vaccine induces immune response against the P. falciparum circumsporozoite protein (PfCSP) [10]. Although it is currently the only vaccine showing reliable efﬁcacy against P. falciparum in a phase III clinical trial, its protective properties are only partial and decline over time [10, 11]. Despite these limitations, it is thought to exhibit public health beneﬁts, especially in children in areas with high transmission and disease activity rates [12]. Unfortunately, funding volume levels for vaccine research and development decreased from US $ 181 million in 2017 to US $ 156 million in 2018, which may have dramatic effects on the development of malaria vaccine research in the future [13]. Not only have new vaccines been discovered in recent decades, numerous vaccines have also been signiﬁcantly improved in terms of tolerability, safety and efﬁcacy. One example is the vaccination against pertussis, which was discovered around 1930. At the time, the inactivated bacteria B. pertussis was ad- ministered for vaccination purposes; however, the inactivated whole cell vaccine frequently produced side effects in the form of redness and swelling at the injection site accompanied by fever and agitation. In the 1980s the whole cell vaccine was replaced by the acellular pertussis vaccine, which had fewer side effects. Currently, the inactivated pertussis toxin is used as an antigen in the production of the acellular vaccine, either alone or in combination with other cell components [14]. The central element in the develop- ment of highly selective vaccines is the identiﬁcation of a speciﬁc and potent antigen structure that induces a long-lasting immunity preventing infection. By in- ducing a highly selective immune response, cross- reactions and side effects can be reduced. Lipopep- tide, lipopolysaccharide and nucleotide-associated
adjuvants target toll-like receptors among other re- ceptors, while genetically modiﬁed helper cell epi- topes support dendritic cells in their recognition of foreign antigens. Simultaneously, immunostimula- tory peptides further enhance the immune response [15]. Vector-based vaccines belong to a category of a new subtype of vaccines in which genes from viruses or bacteria which code for structures that trigger a neu- tralizing immune response are introduced into ap- athogenic carrier viruses (e.g. measles or yellow fever viruses). One example of a carrier virus is the measles strain Schwarz. The carrier virus itself acts as an ad- juvant-like initiator. Consequently, no conventional adjuvant is required. The structural genes introduced multiply with and within the carrier virus in the vac- cinated person, thus inducing a neutralizing immune response. Since these gene segments can be specif- ically selected and inserted, immunogenicity and side effects can be predicted and assessed relatively well [16, 17]; however, one concern that has been discussed is the possibility of a reduced immune re- sponse in subjects with pre-existing immunity due to previous measles vaccinations or measles disease in the past [18]. The fear is that existing and persistent antibody titres against the measles virus could prevent the replication of the carrier virus; however, this only seems to play a minor role in humans since adequate immune responses were detected after vaccination with a measles virus into which a chikungunya anti- gen had been introduced even in individuals with high pre-existing measles titres [19]. Therefore, viral vectors make the development of various antibacte- rial vaccines, e.g. against tuberculosis, seem feasible in the future. At the beginning of the twentieth century, Emil von Behring, Paul Ehrlich and Shibasaburo Kitasato man- aged to develop hyperimmune sera, which functioned as antitoxins against diphtheria and tetanus toxins, thus establishing a treatment option known as serum therapy [20]. Both von Behring and Ehrlich were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their research, von Behring in 1901 for his work on serum therapy and Ehrlich in 1908 for his work on immunity (Table 1). During the same period other approaches to the prophylaxis and treatment of in- fectious diseases were also explored. Later, in the 1970s hyperimmune sera largely came to be replaced by monoclonal antibodies (mAb). From the 1980s onwards, the acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) epidemic prompted the search for immune modulators that may inﬂuence and modulate speciﬁc immune functions, the aim being, of course, to bring about an improvement in immune functionality [21]. Since then, numerous new modulators, antibiotics, antivirals, monoclonal antibodies and vaccines have been developed for the treatment and prophylaxis of infectious diseases.
K Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases 715
review article
winners was 58 years, while the youngest awardee was 32 and Table 1 Overview of Nobel laureates and their scientific con- the oldest 87 at the time of the award ceremony. Source: The tributions to infectious disease and infection immunology re- Nobel Prize, https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/lists/all-nobel- search. Between 1901 and 2019, the Nobel Prize was awarded laureates-in-physiology-or-medicine/ 109 times to 219 scientists. Only 12 women received the No- bel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. The mean age of prize Year Nobel Laureates Prize motivation Emil Adolf von Behring For his work on serum therapy, especially its application against diphtheria, by which he has opened a new 1901 road in the domain of medical science and thereby placed a victorious weapon against illness and deaths in the hands of the physician 1902 Ronald Ross For his work on malaria, by which he has shown how it enters the organism and thereby has laid the founda- tion for successful research on this disease and methods of combating it 1905 Robert Koch For his investigations and discoveries in relation to tuberculosis 1907 Charles Louis Alphonse Laveran In recognition of his work on the role played by protozoa in causing diseases 1908 Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov, Paul Ehrlich In recognition of their work on immunity 1919 Jules Bordet For his discoveries relating to immunity 1926 Johannes Andreas Grib Fibiger For his discovery of the Spiroptera carcinoma 1927 Julius Wagner-Jauregg For his discovery of the therapeutic value of malaria inoculation in the treatment of dementia paralytica (syphilis) 1928 Charles Jules Henri Nicolle For his work on typhus 1939 Gerhard Domagk For the discovery of the antibacterial effects of prontosil 1945 Sir Alexander Fleming, Ernst Boris For the discovery of penicillin and its curative effect in various infectious diseases Chain, Sir Howard Walter Florey 1948 Paul Hermann Müller For his discovery of the high efﬁciency of DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) as a contact poison against several arthropods 1951 Max Theiler For his discoveries concerning yellow fever and how to combat it 1952 Selman Abraham Waksman For his discovery of streptomycin, the ﬁrst antibiotic effective against tuberculosis 1954 John Franklin Enders, Thomas For their discovery of the ability of poliomyelitis viruses to grow in cultures of various types of tissue Huckle Weller, Frederick Chapman Robbins 1958 Joshua Lederberg For his discoveries concerning genetic recombination and the organization of the genetic material of bacteria 1960 Frank Macfarlane Burnet, Peter Brian For discovery of acquired immunological tolerance Medawar 1965 François Jacob, André Lwoff, For their discoveries concerning genetic control of enzyme and virus synthesis Jacques Monod 1966 Francis Peyton Rous For his discovery of tumour-inducing viruses 1969 Max Delbrück, Alfred Day Hershey, For their discoveries concerning the replication mechanism and the genetic structure of viruses Salvador Edward Luria 1972 Gerald M. Edelman, Rodney R. Porter For their discoveries concerning the chemical structure of antibodies 1975 David Baltimore, Renato Dulbecco, For their discoveries concerning the interaction between tumour viruses and the genetic material of the cell Howard Martin Temin 1976 Baruch S. Blumberg, D. Carleton For their discoveries concerning new mechanisms for the origin and dissemination of infectious diseases Gajdusek 1980 Baruj Benacerraf, Jean Dausset, For their discoveries concerning genetically determined structures on the cell surface that regulate immuno- George D. Snell logical reactions 1984 Niels K. Jerne, Georges J.F. Köhler, For theories concerning the speciﬁcity in development and control of the immune system and the discovery of César Milstein the principle for production of monoclonal antibodies 1987 Susumu Tonegawa For his discovery of the genetic principle for generation of antibody diversity 1989 J. Michael Bishop, Harold E. Varmus For their discovery of the cellular origin of retroviral oncogenes 1996 Peter C. Doherty, Rolf M. Zinkernagel For their discoveries concerning the speciﬁcity of the cell-mediated immune defence 1997 Stanley B. Prusiner For his discovery of prions—a new biological principle of infection 2005 Barry J. Marshall, J. Robin Warren For their discovery of the bacterium Helicobacter pylori and its role in gastritis and peptic ulcer disease 2008 Harald zur Hausen For his discovery of human papilloma viruses causing cervical cancer 2008 Françoise Barré-Sinoussi, Luc Mon- For their discovery of the human immunodeﬁciency virus [HIV] tagnier 2011 Bruce A. Beutler, Jules A. Hoffmann For their discoveries concerning the activation of innate immunity 2011 Ralph M. Steinman For his discovery of the dendritic cell and its role in adaptive immunity 2015 William C. Campbell, Satoshi ¯Omura For their discoveries concerning a novel therapy against infections caused by roundworm parasites 2015 Tu Youyou For her discoveries concerning a novel therapy against malaria
K 716 Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases
review article
While the spectrum of activity of most antibiotics is broad and fairly nonselective, monoclonal anti- bodies are usually highly speciﬁc in their effect and can provide an important basis for the development of effective vaccines. Monoclonal antibodies against bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus anthracis, Clostridioides difﬁcile and Escherichia coli are currently being explored. These antibodies are usually human antibody type IgG, whereby the respective complementarity deter- mining regions (CDR) determine to which pathogenic bacterial antigens or strains the antibody binds [22]; however, this requires the identiﬁcation of a reli- able antigen structure in the pathogenic microorgan- ism. Monoclonal antibodies can be produced from phage banks, B cell cultures, B cells immortalized by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) or by cloning sin- gle antigen-speciﬁc B cells [23]. Binding capacity and opsonophagocytic killing (OPK) are indicators of functional capacity and as such must be tested using a range of different test systems. If the putative antibodies show sufﬁcient OPK, they can be tested in preclinical and clinical studies in animal mod- els or humans to further evaluate their therapeutic potential. The human monoclonal antibody 514G3, which is speciﬁcally directed against the cell wall protein S. au- reus-speciﬁc staphylococcal protein A (SpA), has al- ready been tested in both phase I and phase II stud- ies. After initial determination of the maximum toler- ated dose, the effect of the antibody in terms of safety and tolerance was investigated in patients suffering from S. aureus bacteremia, either methicillin-resistant or methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MRSA or MSSA). For this purpose, a regimen consisting of antibody treatment in addition to standard antibiotic therapy was compared to standard antibiotic-only treatment (NCT02357966, https://clinicaltrials.gov). The results of the study are expected imminently. A high level of efﬁcacy has already been shown in animal mod- els. A survival rate of 60% was observed in exper- imental animals receiving the antibody prophylacti- cally, compared to the control group in which no an- imal survived [24]. In another animal model, it was shown that monoclonal antibodies may also be use- ful in eradicating the colonization of the nasopharynx with MRSA [25]. There is also evidence that mon- oclonal antibodies are effective in bioﬁlm-associated infections caused by S. aureus [23]. Another story of success in the quest for therapeu- tics and prophylactics to be used against antibiotic- resistant bacteria is constituted by the development of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies, and the ongo- ing development of vaccines, against the bacterium C. difﬁcile. Initially, whey from C. difﬁcile-infected cows used in the treatment of C. difﬁcile-associated diarrhea (CDI) in humans showed both efﬁcacy with respect to recurrences of infection and good tolera- bility [26]. In the course of the study, toxin A and
toxin B were identiﬁed as relevant immune target structures. The monoclonal antibody bezlotoxumab directed against toxin B in CDI is both efﬁcacious and has the ability to reduce the recurrence rate of CDI by about 10% [27]. Based on the characterization of their neutralizing epitopes, three vaccines against C. difﬁcile in humans have been established in phase II and phase III studies so far. While even formalin-inactivated toxins can still exhibit toxin-speciﬁc effects, immunogenic subunits of toxins, some of which are additionally genetically engineered, are better tolerated. A vaccine made by Sanoﬁ Pasteur MSD that uses the toxoids A and B as antigen targets has been tested in a phase II study in Japan [28]. In addition, a genetically modiﬁed vac- cine manufactured by Pﬁzer also using the toxoids A and B is currently being tested in a phase III study (NCT03090191, https://clinicaltrials.gov). A phase II study involving a recombinant fusion protein from toxins A and B (IC84/VLA84) manufactured by Valneva SE was recently completed (NCT01296386, https:// clinicaltrials.gov) [29]. A completely different approach to immune modu- lation is the foreign stool transplantation or fecal mi- crobiome transfer (FMT). In this procedure, stool from carefully selected and tested donors is transplanted into the intestines of patients suffering from C. difﬁ- cile. Although this form of bacteriotherapy is currently only being used in the context of (multiple) recurrent CDI, it has shown promising results [30]. The FMT has also been described to have positive results in the treatment of other diseases and in the eradica- tion of colonization with antibiotic-resistant bacteria [31]; however, the long-term consequences and side effects of these complex interventions in the human microbiome have not yet been sufﬁciently explored. Careful donor selection and prior testing for infec- tious diseases and colonization with antibiotic-resis- tant microorganisms would seem to be particularly important. In fact, the FDA recently warned against the transfer of multidrug-resistant germs in the con- text of FMT [32]. Monoclonal antibodies, which are not directed against bacteria themselves but against individual components of the immune system, can also be ben- eﬁcial in bacterial infections and serve as immune modulators. A classical example is eculizumab, a re- combinant humanized antibody that binds specif- ically to the protein C5 in the complement sys- tem. This prevents its cleavage, which in turn pre- vents the formation of the membrane attack com- plex C5b-9. Food-associated infections with E. coli serotype O157:H7 are characterized by shigatoxin- induced hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS), which in turn is characterized by the triad of hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia and renal failure, accompanied by bloody diarrhea and neurological failures. In this pro- cess, shigatoxin binds complement factor H, resulting in an excessive response of alternative complement
K Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases 717
review article
activation at the level of factor C3b. This overreac- tion is down-regulated by eculizumab, which binds factor C5 and can thus reduce cerebral damage in HUS [33]. As a consequence, however, infections with encapsulated bacteria (N. meningitidis, H. inﬂuenzae, S. pneumoniae) might occur more frequently, which is why appropriate vaccinations against encapsulated pathogens are highly recommended before using eculizumab [34]. In 1928, penicillin was discovered by the Scotsman Alexander Fleming, and on 12 February 1941 it was used for the ﬁrst time as an antibiotic in a police- man suffering from staphylococcal osteomyelitis [35]. Another early antibiotic, developed by Gerhard Do- magk in 1932, was sulfamidochrysoidin (Prontosil®), the ﬁrst drug from the sulfonamide group [36]. At present, research into new antibiotics appears to be more important than ever, but also more difﬁcult than ever since the challenge of antimicrobial resistance is expected to increase even further in the future. Nor- mally, clinically valuable antibiotics are characterized by a broad spectrum of antimicrobial activity. Re- cently, with the discovery of ridinilazole, a narrow spectrum antibiotic has been developed that is com- paratively speciﬁcally directed against C. difﬁcile. The advantage of ridinilazole is that it minimizes the col- lateral changes to the microbiome that occur dur- ing antibiotic therapy with vancomycin or metronida- zole, the current antibiotics of choice according to the guidelines. Although the mechanism of action has not yet been fully clariﬁed, there is evidence that ridinila- zole not only exerts inﬂuence on the bacteria itself in the gut, but also has therapeutic effects on the bacte- rial toxins A and B and additionally reduces the local inﬂammatory response [37, 38]. Phase III studies were initiated in 2019 (NCT03595566 and NCT03595553, https://clinicaltrials.gov) to further evaluate ridinila- zole’s therapeutic value. Nanoparticles and artiﬁcial liposomes can also be used in the treatment of bacterial infections as they are able to bind bacterial toxins and cause them to lose their toxin-speciﬁc effects. In mice, the adminis- tration of toxin-binding liposomes prevented the clin- ical consequences of sepsis caused by S. aureus or S. pneumoniae within 10 h after infection. Experimen- tal animals which did not receive these liposomes died within 24–33 h [39]. Ever since the discovery of the human immunod- eﬁciency viruses (HIV), people have been looking for effective ways to eliminate it in the body. Bi-speciﬁc T-cell engagers (BiTE) are artiﬁcial monoclonal anti- bodies, which exhibit both a binding site for antigen structures and another for speciﬁc surface proteins on T cells. In vitro experiments have already shown that the viral replication of HIV is suppressed by induc- ing BiTE antibody-mediated redirection of T cells to gp120-expressing cells. It is currently being discussed whether the new generation of antibodies could be used to reach the replicative inactive viral reservoir of
HIV-infected patients and thus achieve complete vi- ral eradication. No therapeutic strategy to target the replicative inactive viral reservoir is available to date, although this reservoir is the main cause of viral re- bound after the interruption of antiretroviral therapy. The reason for this is that the proviral DNA of HIV is anchored in the nucleus of host cells, meaning that replicative inactive cells are not recognized as infected cells by the host immune system [40]. A highly se- lective extraction of proviral DNA without damaging the host cell would be desirable. This goal seems to have been made feasible thanks to the clustered regu- larly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) method [41], which has recently been used to success- fully remove subgenomic HIV-1 DNA fragments from the genome of HIV-infected mice. Up to 5 weeks af- ter therapy, no virus was detectable in 5 of 13 animals, which suggests that the replicative inactive viral reser- voir had been reached [42]. A Chinese scientist caused a scientiﬁc riot when he claimed that he had created the ﬁrst genetically modiﬁed babies using the CRISPR method by induc- ing mutations, which ensured that the CCR5 recep- tor that serves as a major pathogenetic factor in early HIV spread, was not formed, thus protecting the new- borns from infection with HIV [43]. At the moment it is unclear what further consequences this proce- dure will have for the babies. Such interventions in the genomes of unborn humans are ethically highly questionable and require a debate on the framework conditions for the use of the new technologies. In the CRISPR method, CRISPR RNA binds speciﬁcally to DNA sequences and marks relevant sites in the genome, which then are cut by the CRISPR-associ- ated protein 9 (Cas9) nuclease. In this way, gene seg- ments can be speciﬁcally cut out or inserted at cer- tain sites. The same gene scissors can also be used to produce bacteriophages which can destroy spe- ciﬁc gene segments or plasmids in bacteria and thus inhibit pathogenicity factors or selectively switch off speciﬁc resistance mechanisms [44]. Recently, a 15- year-old girl suffering from cystic ﬁbrosis was suc- cessfully treated for disseminated resistant Mycobac- terium abscessus infection after lung transplantation by means of selectively produced bacteriophages [45]. Another promising new method is the so-called T-cell engineering in which speciﬁc receptors directed against non-self antigens of pathogenic microorgan- isms are inserted into the body’s own T-lympho- cytes to give T cells the new ability to target a spe- ciﬁc protein. After in vitro modiﬁcation, the altered lymphocytes are returned to the patient. Currently, this method is mainly used in the ﬁeld of oncology; however, a T-cell-based therapy against pathogenic microorganisms also seems conceivable and offers hope for curative responses in patients with drug- resistant infectious disease [46]. New technical possibilities continue to permit the development of interesting and effective therapeutics
K 718 Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases
review article
and vaccines. Particularly desirable next milestones in this context would be not only vaccines against HIV and tuberculosis, but also cross-species vac- cines against various multidrug-resistant bacterial pathogens.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Conﬂict of interest M. Ebbers, C.J. Hemmer, B. Müller-Hilke and E.C. Reisinger declare that they have no competing in- terests.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Com- mons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permis- sion directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Plotkin SA, Orenstein W, Ofﬁt P, Edwards KM. Plotkin’s vaccines. 7thed. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2018. 2. U.S. National Library of Medicine. History of medicine. 2019. https://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/smallpox/sp_ variolation.html. Accessed27 Aug 2019. 3. Nardelli DT, Munson EL, Callister SM, Schell RF. Human Lyme disease vaccines: past and future concerns. Future Microbiol. 2009;4:457–69. 4. Feldman MF, Mayer Bridwell AE, Scott NE, Vinogradov E, McKee SR, Chavez SM, et al. A promising bioconjugate vaccineagainsthypervirulentKlebsiellapneumoniae. Proc Natl AcadSci. 2019;116(37):18655–63. 5. Gorbalenya AE, Baker SC, Baric RS. The species Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus: classify- ing 2019-nCoV and naming it SARS-CoV-2. Nat Microbiol. 2020;5:536–44. 6. Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University. Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University.. https:// gisanddata.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index. html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6. Accessed 12 May 2020. 7. The World Health Organization (WHO). Draft landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines.. https://www.who. int/who-documents-detail/draft-landscape-of-covid- 19-candidate-vaccines. Accessed11 May 2020. 8. Halfmann PJ, Hatta M, Chiba S, Maemura T, Fan S, Takeda M, et al. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Domestic Cats. NEngl J Med. 2020;383(6):592–4. 9. United States National Library of Medicine at the National Institutes of Health; 2019. https://clinicaltrials.gov. 10. Draper SJ, Sack BK, King CR, Nielsen CM, Rayner JC, Higgins MK, et al. Malaria vaccines: recent advances and newhorizons. Cell HostMicrobe. 2018;24:43–56. 11. RTSSCTP.EfﬁcacyandsafetyofRTS,S/AS01malariavaccine with or without a booster dose in infants and children in
Africa: ﬁnal results of a phase 3, individually randomised, controlledtrial. Lancet. 2015;386:31–45. 12. Schuerman L. RTS,S malaria vaccine could provide major publichealthbeneﬁts. Lancet. 2019;394:735–6. 13. World Health Organization. World Malaria Report 2018. 2010. 14. Cherry JD. The history of pertussis (whooping cough); 1906–2015: facts, myths, and misconceptions. Curr Epi- demiol Rep. 2015;2:120–30. 15. Moyle PM, Toth I. Modern subunit vaccines: development, components, and research opportunities. ChemMed- Chem. 2013;8:360–76. 16. Ura T, Okuda K, Shimada M. Developments in viral vector- basedvaccines. Vaccines. 2014;2:624–41. 17. Choi Y, Chang J. Viral vectors for vaccine applications. Clin ExpVaccineRes. 2013;2:97. 18. Brandler S, Tangy F. Vaccines in development against West Nilevirus. Viruses. 2013;5:2384–409. 19. Reisinger EC, Tschismarov R, Beubler E, Wiedermann U, Firbas C, Loebermann M, et al. Immunogenicity, safety, and tolerability of the measles-vectored chikungunya virus vaccine MV-CHIK: a double-blind, randomised, placebo- controlled and active-controlled phase 2 trial. Lancet. 2018;6736:1–10. 20. Plotkin SA, Plotkin SL. The development of vaccines: how thepastledto thefuture. NatRev Microbiol. 2011;9:889–93. 21. Reisinger EC, Kern P, Dietrich M, Ernst M, Flad HD, et al. Inhibition of HIV progression by dithiocarb. Zeitschrift für Chemotherapie1/2005. ZFC. Lancet1990;335:679–82. 22. Polonelli L, Pontón J, Elguezabal N, Moragues MD, Casoli C, Pilotti E, et al. Antibody complementarity-determining regions (CDRs) can display differential antimicrobial, an- tiviral andantitumor activities. Plos One. 2008;3:e2371. 23. Raafat D, Otto M, Reppschläger K, Iqbal J, Holtfreter S. Fighting staphylococcus aureus bioﬁlms with monoclonal antibodies. Trends Microbiol. 2019;27:303–22. 24. VarshneyAK,KuzmichevaGA,LinJ,SunleyKM,BowlingRA, Kwan T-Y, et al. A natural human monoclonal antibody targetingstaphylococcusproteinAprotectsagainstStaphy- lococcus aureus bacteremia. PLoSONE. 2018;13:e190537. 25. Chen X, Sun Y, Missiakas D, Schneewind O. Staphylococcus aureus decolonization of mice with monoclonal antibody neutralizing protein A. J InfectDis. 2019;219:884–8. 26. Mattila E, Anttila V-J, Broas M, Marttila H, Poukka P, Kuu- sisto K, et al. A randomized, double-blind study comparing Clostridium difﬁcile immune whey and metronidazole for recurrent Clostridium difﬁcile-associated diarrhoea: Ef- ﬁcacy and safety data of a prematurely interrupted trial. ScandJ InfectDis. 2008;40:702–8. 27. Wilcox MH, Gerding DN, Poxton IR, Kelly C, Nathan R, Birch T, et al. Bezlotoxumab for prevention of re- current Clostridium difﬁcile infection. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:305–17. 28. Matsuoka O, Patel DM, Sasaki S, Oka H, Sasaki T, Pietrobon PJ, et al. Safety and immunogenicity of Clostridium difﬁcile toxoid vaccine in Japanese adults. HumVaccin Immunother. 2018;14:322–8. 29. Reisinger EC, Ebbers M, Löbermann M. Clostridium dif- ﬁcile: Antikörpertherapie und Impfungen. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2019;144:842–9. 30. Wilson BC, Vatanen T, Cutﬁeld WS, O’Sullivan JM. The super-donorphenomenoninfecalmicrobiotatransplanta- tion. FrontCell InfectMicrobiol. 2019;9:1–11. 31. Tavoukjian V. Faecal microbiota transplantation for the decolonization of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in the gut: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Hosp Infect. 2019;102:174–88.
K Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases 719
review article
32. U.S. Food & Drug Administration. 2019. https://www.fda. gov/news-events/fda-brief/fda-brief-fda-warns-about- potential-risk-serious-infections-caused-multi-drug- resistant-organisms. Accessed28 Aug 2019. 33. Pape L, Hartmann H, Bange FC, Suerbaum S, Bueltmann E, Ahlenstiel-Grunow T. Eculizumab in typical hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) with neurological involvement. Medicine. 2015;94:e1000. 34. McNamara LA, Topaz N, Wang X, Hariri S, Fox L, MacNeil JR. High risk for invasive meningococcal disease among pa- tients receiving eculizumab (soliris) despite receipt of meningococcal vaccine. Mmwr Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017;66:734–7. 35. Ligon BL. Penicillin: its discovery and early development. Semin Pediatr InfectDis. 2004;15:52–7. 36. Bentley R. Different roads to discovery; Prontosil (hence sulfa drugs) and penicillin (hence β-lactams). J Ind Micro- biol Biotechnol. 2009;36:775–86. 37. Vickers RJ, Tillotson GS, Nathan R, Hazan S, Pullman J, Lucasti C, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of ridinilazole com- pared with vancomycin for the treatment of Clostridium difﬁcile infection: a phase 2, randomised, double-blind, active-controlled, non-inferiority study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2017;17:735–44. 38. Bassères E, Endres BT, Khaleduzzaman M, Miraftabi F, Alam MJ, Vickers RJ, et al. Impact on toxin production and cell morphology in Clostridium difﬁcile by ridinilazole (SMT19969), a novel treatment for C. difﬁcile infection. J AntimicrobChemother. 2016;71:1245–51.
39. Henry BD, Neill DR, Becker KA, Gore S, Bricio-Moreno L, Ziobro R, et al. Engineered liposomes sequester bacterial exotoxins and protect from severe invasive infections in mice. NatBiotechnol. 2015;33:81–8. 40. BrozyJ,SchlaepferE,MuellerCKS,RochatM-A,RampiniSK, Myburgh R, et al. Antiviral activity of HIV gp120-targeting bispeciﬁc T cell engager antibody constructs. J Virol. 2018;92:1–13. 41. Ophinni Y, Inoue M, Kotaki T, Kameoka M. CRISPR/Cas9 system targeting regulatory genes of HIV-1 inhibits viral replication in infectedT-cell cultures. Sci Rep. 2018;8:1–12. 42. Dash PK, Kaminski R, Bella R, Su H, Mathews S, Ahooyi TM, et al. Sequential LASER ART and CRISPR treatments eliminate HIV-1 in a subset of infected humanized mice. NatCommun. 2019;10:2753. 43. Cyranoski D. Genome-edited baby claim provokes interna- tional outcry. Nature. 2018;563:607–8 44. Beisel CL, Gomaa AA, Barrangou R. A CRISPR de- sign for next-generation antimicrobials. Genome Biol. 2014;15:516. 45. Dedrick RM, Guerrero-Bustamante CA, Garlena RA, Rus- sell DA, Ford K, Harris K, et al. Engineered bacteriophages for treatment of a patient with a disseminated drug-resis- tantMycobacteriumabscessus. NatMed. 2019;25:730–3. 46. Sadelain M, Rivière I, Riddell S. Therapeutic T cell engineer- ing. Nature. 2017;545:423–31.
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
K 720 Immunotherapy and vaccination against infectious diseases
