Graphical scheme representing the interactions among different stages of infection in the mathematical model SIDARTHE: S,
susceptible (uninfected); I, infected (asymptomatic or pauci-symptomatic infected, undetected); D, diagnosed (asymptomatic infected, detected); A,
ailing (symptomatic infected, undetected); R, recognized (symptomatic infected, detected); T, threatened (infected with life-threatening symptoms,
detected); H, healed (recovered); E, extinct (dead).
α, β, γ and δ respectively denote the transmission rate (the probability of
disease transmission in a single contact multiplied by the average number
of contacts per person) due to contacts between a susceptible subject and an
infected, a diagnosed, an ailing or a recognized subject. Typically, α is larger
than γ (assuming that people tend to avoid contacts with subjects showing
symptoms, even though diagnosis has not been made yet), which in turn is
larger than β and δ (assuming that subjects who have been diagnosed are
properly isolated). Tese parameters can be modifed by social-distancing
policies (for example, closing schools, remote working, lockdown). Te risk
of contagion due to threatened subjects, treated in proper ICUs, is assumed
negligible.
•	 ε and θ capture the probability rate of detection, relative to asymptomatic and
symptomatic cases, respectively. Tese parameters, also modifable, refect
the level of attention on the disease and the number of tests performed over
the population: they can be increased by enforcing a massive contact tracing
and testing campaign28. Note that θ is typically larger than ε, as a symptomatic
individual is more likely to be tested.
•	 ζ and η denote the probability rate at which an infected subject, respectively
not aware and aware of being infected, develops clinically relevant symptoms,
and are comparable in the absence of specifc treatment. Tese parameters are
disease-dependent, but may be partially reduced by improved therapies and
acquisition of immunity against the virus.
•	 µ and ν respectively denote the rate at which undetected and detected infected
subjects develop life-threatening symptoms; they are comparable if there is
no known specifc treatment that is efective against the disease, otherwise µ
may be larger. Conversely, ν may be larger because infected individuals with
more acute symptoms, who have a higher risk of worsening, are more likely to
have been diagnosed. Tese parameters can be reduced by means of improved
therapies and acquisition of immunity against the virus.
•	 τ denotes the mortality rate (for infected subjects with life-threatening symptoms) and can be reduced by means of improved therapies.
•	 λ, κ, ξ, ρ and σ denote the rate of recovery for the fve classes of infected subjects; they may difer signifcantly if an appropriate treatment for the disease
is known and adopted for diagnosed patients, but are probably comparable
otherwise. Tese parameters can be increased thanks t